[Sig Events] Add architecture and operator docs (#7497)
elastic/docs-content: solutions/observability/streams/significant-events/index.md

applies_to:
  serverless: beta
  stack: beta 9.5+
products:
  - id: observability
  - id: elasticsearch
  - id: kibana
  - id: cloud-serverless
  - id: cloud-hosted
  - id: cloud-enterprise
  - id: cloud-kubernetes
  - id: elastic-stack
---

# Significant Events [streams-sig-events-overview]

Significant Events continuously converts raw log data into a ranked feed of incidents. The pipeline moves from broad to narrow: many alerting rule executions produce fewer statistical detections, which an AI agent correlates into even fewer discoveries, which a judge reviews and surfaces as Significant Events.

For example: you onboard a stream, Significant Events extracts what's in it ("this stream contains a Python gRPC service called `recommendationservice` running on GKE"), generates targeted detection rules ("detect gRPC connection failures"), and runs those rules continuously. Results flow through discovery and surface as correlated Significant Events across your entire environment.

## Before you get started [sig-events-prerequisites]

Significant Events requires an **Enterprise license** or an active Enterprise trial.

> To use Significant Events you also need:

Reviewer: There is this feature flag:

```
feature_flags.overrides:
  streams.significantEventsAvailable: true
```

---
navigation_title: Significant Events
description: Significant Events automatically correlates signals from your log streams into prioritized incidents using a combination of deterministic detection and AI-powered investigation.
applies_to:
  serverless: beta
  stack: beta 9.5+
products:
  - id: observability
  - id: elasticsearch
  - id: kibana
  - id: cloud-serverless
  - id: cloud-hosted
  - id: cloud-enterprise
  - id: cloud-kubernetes
  - id: elastic-stack
---

# Significant Events [streams-sig-events-overview]

> Significant Events continuously converts raw log data into a ranked feed of incidents. The pipeline moves from broad to narrow: many alerting rule executions produce fewer statistical detections, which an AI agent correlates into even fewer discoveries, which a judge reviews and surfaces as Significant Events.

Reviewer 2: Good idea to present a simplified version of the flow, then a concrete example to anchor it. My only suggestion would be to remove some of the specialized terms since this is the very first explanation of the feature that readers/users would encounter in the docs, and it should be simple enough for anyone to understand. For example:

```suggestion
Significant Events continuously converts raw log data into a ranked feed of incidents. The pipeline moves from broad to narrow. Many alerts fire, an AI agent narrows these down into findings, and the most important ones are surfaced as Significant Events.
```

For example: you onboard a stream, Significant Events extracts what's in it ("this stream contains a Python gRPC service called `recommendationservice` running on GKE"), generates targeted detection rules ("detect gRPC connection failures"), and runs those rules continuously. Results flow through discovery and surface as correlated Significant Events across your entire environment.

## Before you get started [sig-events-prerequisites]

> Significant Events requires an **Enterprise license** or an active Enterprise trial.

Reviewer 2: The page-level `applies_to` tags makes me think this feature is available in serverless too, so you prob need to add the [serverless-equivalent](https://www.elastic.co/docs/solutions/observability/observability-serverless-feature-tiers#obs-subscription-features) here.

To use Significant Events you also need:

> - The `streams.significantEventsAvailable: true` feature flag enabled in your {{kib}} configuration.

Reviewer 3: This is not fully true, we control that setting for a controlled rollout, so users won't know about this.

> - The `observability:streamsSigEventsScheduledDiscoveryEnabled` {{kib}} setting enabled (required for the detection, discovery, and triage workflows).

Reviewer 3: I wouldn't expose this directly, we programmatically enable/disable that setting, and it is transparent to the user since they cannot update it from the advanced settings page.

> - A [Generative AI connector](kibana://reference/connectors-kibana/gen-ai-connectors.md), which routes LLM calls and incurs additional costs.

Reviewer 2: Idk if you want to include that last detail here. If you need to, it could be better to add it as a note so it's not part of the main requirement. In it's current state, the line reads as "You specifically need a Generative AI connector that routs LLM calls _and_ costs you extra money". I'm fairly positive we're not  suggesting that 😅 (though I can see Claude recommending it 🤖 )

```suggestion
- A [Generative AI connector](kibana://reference/connectors-kibana/gen-ai-connectors.md), which routes LLM calls.
```

## How the pipeline works [sig-events-pipeline]

> The pipeline runs in sequential phases that build on the output of the previous phase. KI extraction and rule generation prepare your streams for detection and run on your schedule. Detection and discovery run continuously in the background after you enable Significant Events.

Reviewer 2: Define first instance

```suggestion
The pipeline runs in sequential phases that build on the output of the previous phase. Knowledge Indicator (KI) extraction and rule generation prepare your streams for detection and run on your schedule. Detection and discovery run continuously in the background after you enable Significant Events.
```

### 1. Knowledge indicator extraction [sig-events-phase-ki]

> An LLM analyzes log samples from your streams and extracts services, infrastructure, dependencies, and failure patterns as Knowledge Indicators (KIs). Deterministic generators run in parallel to produce dataset statistics, log patterns, and error samples.

Reviewer 2: Quick note about terminology - Earlier on the page, the actor performing the extraction is an AI agent. Here, it's an LLM. While the two are prob used interchangeably, it'd be good to settle on a single entity for the sake of consistency. 

```suggestion
An LLM analyzes log samples from your streams and extracts services, infrastructure, dependencies, and failure patterns as KIs. Deterministic generators run in parallel to produce dataset statistics, log patterns, and error samples.
```

### 2. Rule generation [sig-events-phase-rules]

> An LLM converts KIs into {{esql}} alerting rules scoped to the services and failure modes present in each stream. Generated rules are saved as unbacked stream assets — you review and promote them before they start running.

Reviewer 3: suggestion: this isn't the whole story, and the exception matters to operators.

High-severity MATCH queries auto-promote. In `persist_queries.ts`, `isRuleEligible` returns true when `severity_score >= HIGH_SEVERITY_THRESHOLD` (60), and those queries get rule-backed at generation time via `replaceStreamQueries` — they start running without any manual review. Only lower-severity queries are saved unbacked and wait for promotion. Since the whole point of this sentence is "nothing runs until you say so," the auto-run path is worth calling out.

```suggestion
An LLM converts KIs into {{esql}} alerting rules scoped to the services and failure modes present in each stream. Generated rules are saved as stream assets. Lower-severity rules stay unbacked until you review and promote them; high-severity detections are promoted automatically and begin running right away.
```

### 3. Rule execution and detection [sig-events-phase-detection]

> Promoted rules run against stream data on a per-rule schedule and write matching events to the alerts index. A detection workflow runs `change_point` analysis across those results every minute and writes detection records for statistically significant transitions.

Reviewer 2: (Revisiting this comment to apply my understanding from digging through the nightshift program repo)

Change point analysis might be an internal term - it's not used in Elasticsearch's change point aggregation [docs](https://www.elastic.co/docs/reference/aggregations/search-aggregations-change-point-aggregation). It's also be good to replace "detection records" with "detection documents", which is used more often throughout this PR.

Here's the revision I came up with after spending some time in the nightshift program repo:

```suggestion
Promoted rules execute on a specified schedule against stream logs and record a count of matches per time bucket to the `.rule-events` index. A Detection workflow runs change point aggregation against those per-rule counts and writes a detection record whenever the aggregation finds a statistically significant shift.
```

> Promoted rules run against stream data on a per-rule schedule and write matching events to the alerts index. A detection workflow runs `change_point` analysis across those results every minute and writes detection records for statistically significant transitions.

Reviewer 3: issue (blocking): "every minute" contradicts the code and the other two pages in this PR.

The default detection workflow schedule is **10 minutes**, not one minute (`DEFAULT_SIG_EVENTS_SCHEDULED_DETECTION_INTERVAL_MINUTES = 10` in `common/constants.ts`). One minute is the *change-point histogram bucket interval* (`DEFAULT_..._BUCKET_INTERVAL_MINUTES = 1`) and the *minimum configurable* schedule, but not the cadence. `how-it-works.md` and `operator-guide.md` both correctly say "cron 10m", so this line is also internally inconsistent.

```suggestion
Promoted rules run against stream data on a per-rule schedule and write matching events to the alerts index. A detection workflow runs `change_point` analysis across those results about every 10 minutes and writes detection records for statistically significant transitions.
```

### 4. Discovery [sig-events-phase-discovery]

> Two agents run in sequence. The Discovery agent reads detection records, correlates signals across rules and streams, and writes discovery records. The Judge agent independently verifies each discovery and promotes, acknowledges, or dismisses it as a Significant Event.

Reviewer 2: This is cool - new agents. If these are built-in agents, the [Elastic Agent docs](https://www.elastic.co/docs/explore-analyze/ai-features/agent-builder/builtin-agents-reference) will prob need to be updated at some point.

Reviewer 2: Nvm, it's already doc'd [here](https://docs-v3-preview.elastic.dev/elastic/docs-content/pull/7497/solutions/observability/streams/significant-events/how-it-works#sig-events-hiw-discovery-agent)! This would be a good place to link that section.

> Two agents run in sequence. The Discovery agent reads detection records, correlates signals across rules and streams, and writes discovery records. The Judge agent independently verifies each discovery and promotes, acknowledges, or dismisses it as a Significant Event.

Reviewer 3: issue (blocking): "promotes, acknowledges, or dismisses" — those aren't the actual statuses.

The judge's status enum is `['open', 'closed', 'dismissed']` (`kbn-significant-events-schema/.../events/index.ts:13`, and the triage workflow's structured-output enum matches). "Promote" and "acknowledge" don't exist as judge actions. (There's a stale one-liner in `judge.ts`'s agent description that still says "promote, acknowledge, or demote" — I suspect that's where this came from, but it doesn't match the schema or the judge instructions.)

```suggestion
Two agents run in sequence. The Discovery agent reads detection records, correlates signals across rules and streams, and writes discovery records. The Judge agent independently verifies each discovery and sets its status to open, closed, or dismissed.
```
